docs: Rich text formatting section (#713)
software-mansion/react-native-enriched: docs/docs/rich-text-formatting/basic-styles.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import InteractiveExample from '@site/src/components/InteractiveExample';
import BasicStylesEditor from '@site/src/examples/BasicStylesEditor';
import BasicStylesEditorSrc from '!!raw-loader!@site/src/examples/BasicStylesEditor';

> # Basic styles

Reviewer: When I click any section under Rich Text Formatting, it navigates to the correct section, but the page scrolls to somewhere in the middle instead of positioning the section at the top.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5f8cbb79-e1c4-42a5-a0a7-97da7873832a

In [Your first editor](/fundamentals/your-first-editor) you wired up a single

> **Bold** button. Every other formatting style works exactly the same way: a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Bold** button. Almost every other formatting style works exactly the same way: a
```

`toggle` method on the `ref` changes the text, and `onChangeState` reports back
whether the style is active. The only exceptions to that rule are **mentions**,

> **links** and **inline images**, which work a bit differently. They cannot be toggled

Reviewer 2: How about alignment?

Author: I would not explicitly mention it here and let it fall into "toggleable" styles. It is now listed just below, among other paragraph styles

on/off on any text - they require additional data to be valid, but you'll learn more
about them in further sections. This page walks through the rest of the basic rich
text styles and the one core distinction that shapes how they behave - **inline**
versus **paragraph** formatting.

## Inline styles

Inline styles wrap a range of characters. Toggling one applies it to exactly the

> characters you have selected, or - if nothing is selected - arms it so the next

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
characters you have selected, or - if nothing is selected - enables it so the next
```

> characters you type come out styled. This is the family the bold belongs to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
characters you type come out styled. This family includes:
```

- **Bold** - `toggleBold()`
- **Italic** - `toggleItalic()`
- **Underline** - `toggleUnderline()`
- **Strikethrough** - `toggleStrikeThrough()`
- **Inline code** - `toggleInlineCode()`

They combine freely, so a word can be bold and italic and underlined at
once.

:::note

There are two more inline styles, which you cannot toggle quite like the others - **links** and **mentions**. You'll learn about them in their respective sections, once you finish this chapter.

:::

## Paragraph styles

Paragraph styles apply to a whole paragraph at once. Toggling one affects the entire paragraph the
cursor sits in (or every paragraph the selection touches), no matter how much of
it is actually selected. The common ones are:

- **Headings** - `toggleH1()` through `toggleH6()`
- **Blockquote** - `toggleBlockQuote()`
- **Code block** - `toggleCodeBlock()`
- **Unordered list** - `toggleUnorderedList()`
- **Ordered list** - `toggleOrderedList()`
- **Checkbox list** - `toggleCheckboxList(checked: boolean)`

> 

Reviewer 2: Same here, about alignement?

:::note

We will not touch list styles for now - we'll cover them in-depth in their [own section](/rich-text-formatting/lists).

:::

The key difference from inline styles is that **a paragraph can only have one
paragraph style at a time**. A line can't be both a heading and a blockquote, so
toggling a second paragraph style replaces the first rather than stacking on top.
The editor surfaces this through the `isConflicting` flag in `onChangeState`.

Code blocks go one step further: they **block** inline styles entirely. You
can't make text bold inside a code block, and `onChangeState` reports bold as

> `isBlocking` there so you can grey the button out.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`isBlocking` there so you can grey the toolbar button out.
```

:::

## Building the toolbar

A toolbar with many styles is just the [first editor](/fundamentals/your-first-editor)
loop repeated. Each button reads its slice of the `onChangeState` payload for
`isActive` (to highlight it) and `isBlocking` (to disable it), and calls the
matching `toggle` method on press:

```tsx
const inlineButtons = [
  { label: 'Bold', state: state?.bold, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleBold() },
  { label: 'Italic', state: state?.italic, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleItalic() },
  { label: 'Underline', state: state?.underline, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleUnderline() },
  { label: 'Strike', state: state?.strikeThrough, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleStrikeThrough() },
];

const paragraphButtons = [
  { label: 'H1', state: state?.h1, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleH1() },
  { label: 'H2', state: state?.h2, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleH2() },
  { label: 'Quote', state: state?.blockQuote, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleBlockQuote() },
  { label: 'Code', state: state?.codeBlock, onPress: () => ref.current?.toggleCodeBlock() },
];

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would remove `state?` optional chaining there. In this context it's not clear why it's defined like that and we can avoid creating such confusion

Author: I'm not sure, as that code would not match the actual code of the example component. It might be more confusing if the code is not correct by itself and not fully copy-pasteable

## Try it out

And just like that we've expanded our editor with several new styles to choose
from a small toolbar. Select some text and toggle inline styles, or place the cursor
on a line and try the paragraph ones - notice how switching from **H1** to **Quote**
swaps the style instead of adding to it, and how the inline buttons grey out once
you're inside a **Code** block.

> <InteractiveExample src={BasicStylesEditorSrc} component={BasicStylesEditor} />

Reviewer: When we toggle heading, text is hidden:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/61366744-78af-47ab-a8e0-fef767976773

Author: #710 fixed it, but there is the same case as in your previous comment
